Nic: Hi, I'm Nic Steenhout, and this is The Work Between. Before I get into what
Nic: the show is, I want to say whose land it's made on. This podcast is recorded on the
Nic: traditional, ancestral, and unceded territory of the Stó:lō Coast Salish
Nic: people. The people of the river, whose presence in the Fraser Valley stretches
Nic: back thousands of years. I named this territory because it belongs with what this show is
Nic: about. The ways we decide whose lives are valued, whose work is taken seriously, and
Nic: whose experiences are treated as problems to be managed. Those decisions shape
Nic: everything. This show sits inside that. This is, was, and always will be First
Nic: Nations land. That's not a formality. It's consistent with everything I and this show
Nic: stand for. My guest today is Mia Seljubac, and we just discussed how to
Nic: pronounce the name, and I know I fluffed it up, but my apologies. Mia is a
Nic: games lawyer, turned game developer and co-founder of Serial Mug Games. She's
Nic: currently working on a cozy narrative game called I Am the Cat, where all the
Nic: animation and textures are completely hand-painted in watercolor. Mia works in a
Nic: variety of mediums, including ink, watercolors, and acrylics, and she sells
Nic: hand-painted jackets at her local tattoo parlor. Hi, Mia, thanks for joining me for
Nic: this talk about creativity. How are you?
Mia: I'm good. Thank you, thank you for having me.
Nic: So there's a lot to talk about here, but my first question really is how does
Nic: one go from being a lawyer to being a game developer?
Mia: It's kind of an interesting story. It's not like one happened and then
Mia: the other happened. Like, um, all the way back to the beginning. So I grew up playing
Mia: video games, always loved them. Um, I liked a lot of fighting games like Street Fighter
Mia: and Dead or Alive, and that led me down a path of learning martial arts, and then my
Mia: first job was actually as a martial arts instructor, and I taught kung fu classes.
Mia: And I had to learn a little bit about business and being self-employed. And then
Mia: COVID happened, and you can't have people punching each other when there's a
Mia: pandemic, so I was like, okay, I'm going to retrain. I find the kind of contract
Mia: negotiation stuff interesting. I'd done volunteering with a few organizations that
Mia: worked with lawyers, so I went and retrained as a lawyer. And then I found
Mia: out that video game lawyer is a job that exists. So I kind of do law within the
Mia: games industry for the love of it, uh, and it's an industry that I know quite well,
Mia: having just been immersed in it from like as long as I can remember. Yeah. I was
Mia: part of a weird generation of lawyers that were told that if you don't learn how to
Mia: code, the machines are going to take your job. And I actually went and did it, and
Mia: I'm like, well, why can't I try and use these skills to make a game myself and
Mia: give it a go and see how that pans out? And, uh, it's panning out well, and having a
Mia: lot of fun.
Nic: Fantastic. I want to explore that game thing a little bit more, but, um, I
Nic: had no idea you were a martial artist, and I find it interesting because I
Nic: starting at age six, I did 18 years of judo, and the only reason I didn't end up
Nic: getting my black belt is because, uh, the only way I had access to do it is on
Nic: points and competition, and people are just vicious in competitions. I was not
Nic: interested. And then I, um, I didn't do kung fu, but I did, uh, Taoist Tai Chi for about six
Nic: years, so very, very different.
Mia: yeah, no. Um, so my style of kung fu that I specialize in is Wing Chun,
Mia: and it has a lot in common with Tai Chi, right? And, uh, one of my Wing Chun
Mia: instructors is also a Tai Chi instructor, so I've learned both styles from him, and,
Mia: yeah, no, Tai Chi is awesome.
Nic: that's kind of neat. Uh, a bit of commonality that was not expected. So
Nic: we'll speak about, um, game development, but because your game is rooted in
Nic: watercolors, I'd love to learn more about your watercolors. Tell me about that. How,
Nic: what is it you do? Obviously, watercolors, but what style? How do you work with
Nic: watercolor?
Mia: so I'm very inspired by like really old illustrated children's books like
Mia: Books and the Paddington books. I try and wanted to, I wanted to make the
Mia: game feel like it was in a storybook, um, and that's the kind of style that I've tried
Mia: to adopt. It's very loose, uh, the line work is very kind of sketchy and rough, and I
Mia: wanted it to just kind of feel like, you know, I feel like a drawing that was alive,
Mia: if that makes sense.
Nic: So a lot looser than strict. And, you know, quite
Mia: yeah. It's interesting because when you're animating in watercolor, like, it's
Mia: all completely hand-painted, like, using a light box, so I have to trace animation
Mia: frames on top of each other, and when you're doing that, the paint kind of
Mia: behaves the way that it wants to. Like, you can control watercolor to an extent.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: so for some of the animations that are in the game, I completely embrace
Mia: that. I let the watercolor do what it wants, and I like the feel of like the
Mia: moving in weird ways that animation doesn't tend to, but when you've got
Mia: characters that you're looking at all the time, like the cat that you play as, um, I
Mia: have to take it into a program and kind of normalize some of that out, like add some
Mia: filters to it so that it doesn't look too jarring or too tiring on the eye to look
Mia: at all the time.
Nic: How many illustrations, how many watercolors do you have to do for, I don't
Nic: know, a segment of one minute of gameplay?
Mia: So it's all done in loops. So the cat, at the moment, the walking
Mia: animation is about 16 frames moving in different directions. Um, but there are lots
Mia: of different little animations for interacting with things. I think I've
Mia: drawn like, I think I've drawn about 120 versions of this cat at this point. Um, but
Mia: other NPCs have, like, the other characters that walk around the world,
Mia: the walking animations are quite like low frame rate, so some of them have like
Mia: four frames in each direction walking, but they'll have more complex and detailed
Mia: animations. Like, I decided to animate a character who's a barista, like making a
Mia: coffee, like taking the portafilter out of the machine and tamping it and putting it
Mia: back in the machine, and all of those little movements take a lot of individual
Mia: drawings. Um, so some characters have a lot more than others.
Nic: That's amazing. How did you learn watercolors?
Mia: so my mom was always really artsy, so whenever we'd go anywhere, uh, she'd kind of
Mia: encourage me to take a little sketchbook and like draw what I see. And it's really
Mia: cheap and easy to get your kid, like, one of those little, like, they have these little red
Mia: tins that you can pick up, and like, we used to be able to grab them in like an
Mia: and they cost like under a fiver, and you could get one of these little tins
Mia: and just learn.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: So that's how I picked it up initially. But I only kind of decided to
Mia: get serious about it much later. Like, I got myself a nice set of watercolors on
Mia: sale and just got stuck in, watched a bunch of tutorials.
Nic: So you're self-taught rather than having someone teaching you how to
Nic: do it beyond your mom encouraging you, obviously.
Mia: Yeah, so she taught me how to use paints and how to mix colors. She's a
Mia: professional artist. She went from fashion design, where a lot of the
Mia: illustrated in color. She uses watercolor and color pencils for that, and then she
Mia: moved into stained glass, so she's got like quite an artsy background, and she
Mia: went to college for ceramics and stained glass as well. So I had quite a good set
Mia: of knowledge in my household to like draw off of.
Nic: Is your mother an influence in your art? I mean, obviously she taught you, but
Nic: is her style of work an influence in your style of work? And if not, or if yes, do
Nic: you have other influences?
Mia: Yes and no. Like, her art is very classically inspired. Like, she draws a lot
Mia: of inspiration from artists like Leonardo da Vinci, and, uh, she used to take us to
Mia: different exhibits at like the V&A and at different museums around London, and take
Mia: inspiration from lots of different places. Um, my main inspirations for the game are like
Mia: I mentioned, the Paddington Bear book, that's a big one, and like the
Mia: illustrations. Um, in terms of other influences, it's hard to pin down
Mia: because it's such a huge mix of things. Like, I have lots of artists that I really
Mia: love and I'll like borrow little bits from here and there. Um, like, I initially
Mia: learned how to paint with inks, which is a little bit different, and I was really
Mia: inspired by, like, uh, a video game artist like Yoshitaka Amano, who's the illustrator
Mia: for like the Final Fantasy concept art, and his illustrations are extremely beautiful,
Mia: and like they have that loose, flowy movement style that's got like a lot of
Mia: fashion design influences. Yeah.
Nic: Painting with ink, that's, uh, just, do you do ink washes, adding water to the ink,
Nic: or just pure ink? Or how do you do that?
Mia: So I got like one of those old dip pens, like, from a craft shop when I
Mia: was a kid, uh, so I'll like dip that directly into my little inkwell and sketch. Uh, but
Mia: then when I go to color, I'll do different washes. Like, usually I'll stick to like
Mia: one or two colors and just get the variation by adding water.
Nic: Right. Are you an artist or an artisan?
Mia: What is the difference?
Nic: I think for me, an artist is, there's room to fail, there's room to be wrong. Uh, an
Nic: artisan has to be able to replicate what they're doing. And I guess in this context
Nic: the idea of artist versus artisan is important, because as a watercolorist you
Nic: can be an artist, but as a games maker where you're relying on your painting, you
Nic: don't, I mean, yeah, okay, watercolor has a mind of its own, but you don't have
Nic: that much room for error.
Mia: It's interesting because I found, when I'll do like a character
Mia: concept, it will be very loose and free-flowing in terms of my process, and
Mia: I'll let the paint do what it wants to. I'll let my mind wander and do
Mia: what it wants to. And then you kind of, even if you're not trying to, when you go
Mia: through the process of drawing each frame over and over and over, you get more
Mia: precise and you get a lot cleaner, and you kind of have to almost fight back against
Mia: that. And, like, I, it was this process when I first started animating characters with
Mia: watercolor, to kind of embrace the chaos a little bit, because I had to make a
Mia: decision of whether or not I wanted to try and replicate what I did the first time
Mia: for every single frame, or lean into the differences. And I hope that it kind of
Mia: gives the game a little bit of a unique feeling, the fact that I've gone with the
Mia: latter approach, and just embraced the fact that all of the frames aren't going to
Mia: look perfect. Like, if I was animating digitally,
Nic: I really need to grab the game and try it. I'm very curious about what that
Nic: actually looks like. What keeps you coming back to this? What's the motivation
Nic: between, you know, doing the watercolor and doing it over and over for that game?
Nic: Is the game, having a completed game, the motivation itself? Is the watercolor
Nic: why do you keep going and doing
Mia: it? One of the things that's so amazing about game development is you
Mia: really do have to learn to love every single bit of the process. Um, and there's a
Mia: lot to it. Like, it's not just the watercolor animation. It's also the
Mia: programming and the writing. There's a lot of elements that need to come together. So
Mia: one thing that keeps me going with it is the fact that if I'm getting tired of
Mia: animating, if I'm getting a bit, like, my brain is getting tired or my hands are
Mia: getting tired, I can switch to something else. I can think about what the
Mia: characters are saying to each other, and it allows you to kind of, you know, pick
Mia: up where your energy
Nic: is. Yeah.
Mia: I am very motivated by finishing the game because a lot of people who I've
Mia: shown it to have said that they're really keen to see the finished product, and
Mia: that's terrifying, but it's also like, okay, people are waiting for this to come
Mia: out. I actually have to finish it. But it's one of those things, a lot of people
Mia: pick up game development and they don't finish their game because they've got a
Mia: lot of ambition, but sitting down and actually doing it becomes a bit of a
Mia: chore.
Nic: Yep.
Mia: So yeah, learning to enjoy every bit of the process. Like, you get
Mia: into a bit of a flow state when you're animating a bunch of frames, and
Mia: you're painting them one by one, and then it all comes together, and you see you
Mia: see the cat walk in a little circle or curl up and go to sleep, and it's just
Mia: like, it's just a really nice feeling.
Nic: Yeah. I bet. What do you make that you don't show anyone else?
Mia: I have a sketchbook that's just for me. Um, and I feel like I need that to let
Mia: the mind wander and keep it as something that I enjoy. Like, I studied English
Mia: literature at university, and I always had a book going that wasn't part
Mia: of my syllabus, to remind myself I enjoy reading.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: And I feel like, you know, my own sketchbooks that I don't show people are
Mia: kind of that, because when you're doing art for a product, it kind of
Mia: can start to feel like you're doing it for other people. And you need that little bit
Mia: of, you know, that little bit of privacy to explore and grow, and kill the
Mia: perfectionist. And,
Nic: yeah, so, draw things other than cats, right?
Mia: Draw things other than cats. Yeah. I've been really inspired by fashion
Mia: illustration lately. I've been looking up like drawings of clothing and trying to
Mia: copy those in ink, and trying to put a little bit of my own flair on it, and
Mia: because it's a completely new style that I've never done before, it doesn't look
Mia: great. So, or it doesn't look great all the time. Sometimes it does, sometimes it
Mia: doesn't. And you're not going to get good at something unless you just do it, and
Mia: you do it badly at first.
Nic: Is it about ending up with a good-looking drawing or painting, or is it
Nic: about the journey to getting there?
Mia: I think it needs to be about the journey, and like, being able to draw
Mia: something without the pressure of how it's going to turn out is really, really
Mia: freeing. Um, so like, as much as it's really rewarding to see the skills develop and
Mia: to see it build, and to see that finished product starting to look better and better
Mia: each time, like, it's about just being able to do something that relaxes me and brings
Mia: me joy.
Nic: Yeah. So when it doesn't bring you joy, when you're stuck, what does
Nic: that feel like? And how do you get unstuck?
Mia: That is the million-dollar question. Different things get me
Mia: unstuck. Usually, if I'm feeling stuck, um, you either have to power through or change
Mia: pace. Like, if I'm doing animation frames, it's something that I've done, I know that
Mia: I'm good at. I can do it and I can kind of almost zone out and just do it, and that
Mia: can kind of get the hands moving in a way that feels familiar. And it's just
Mia: like, oh yeah, I can draw. And it doesn't feel like you're trying to overcome a
Mia: creative block because you're not really doing anything new. You're doing like
Mia: something that you're used to. It's like breathing. Uh, but when you're trying to,
Mia: like, you know, oh, I need to design this new environment for the game, and you're
Mia: actually trying to exercise those creative muscles a little bit, that can be really
Mia: frustrating. I find the things that get me out of those blocks are turning to other
Mia: artists. Like, I recently played a game called Sorry We're Closed, which has just
Mia: the most incredible visual style, like, all of the environments, all of the character
Mia: art is just so gorgeous, and it's one of the most unique-looking games that I've
Mia: played in a really long time. And like, I was going through a little bit of a
Mia: creative rut when I picked it up, and then it's like, you just, you just get all of
Mia: these ideas. It's like, okay, all right, I'm motivated to draw. I'm gonna go and
Mia: I'm gonna try and make some things.
Nic: What's the most useful criticism you got
Mia: on, like, my work? Or
Nic: yeah, on your work? Not personally, but has there been anyone that said, hey,
Nic: you know, this part of your work it's no good, and make it better, or whatever?
Mia: I, it's, useful criticisms, that's kind of hard because I feel like a lot of
Mia: people, if they have thoughts, if they have something that they don't like about
Mia: a piece of art, people tend to, you know, keep that to themselves.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: yeah. And I went through what I'm sure a lot of people have gone through,
Mia: where you do art at school and you're trying to do something that's a little bit
Mia: different, or a little bit like not the syllabus, and art teachers have kind of
Mia: tried to like shut you down and go, no, you need to know this exactly how we say it.
Mia: And that kind of, I was always like a little bit of a rebel growing up, so it'd
Mia: be like, I knew that you have to play the game to get the good grade. So
Mia: I would try and like balance that criticism. I didn't ignore
Mia: it. I understand the importance of learning the fundamentals and why we're
Mia: told to, you know, do still life and, you know, not jump straight into stylism. But
Mia: it also kind of made me value exploring those different styles that my teachers
Mia: were telling me not to do. Yeah. I don't know if that makes sense. I'm kind of,
Nic: what I'm hearing is being basically told to conform to what is there and what
Nic: you have to do and what you have to learn, but those limits also being, um, a motivation
Nic: to go outside of the bounds of the trail and to explore what's out there as a way
Nic: to grow.
Mia: Yeah. Like, um, I think that if you get very good at doing art in school, if
Mia: you're one of the kids that gets the good grades, you kind of almost are encouraged
Mia: to become a little bit of a human photocopier. If you're a kid that doesn't
Mia: like doing that, you just get very bored. You're like, yeah, but it doesn't, I'm not
Mia: saying anything, I'm not doing anything new. This picture already exists. I've
Mia: just copied it. Is
Nic: saying something important to you?
Mia: I think that's, saying something is everything.
Nic: What do you want to say?
Mia: So if we bring it back to the game, like, the thing that motivated me to make
Mia: the game was, I was working in a corporate job in London and I was incredibly
Mia: lonely. And I, like, there was this, there was a cat that lived on my street that
Mia: everybody knew by name. Nobody knew who she belonged to, and like, people would
Mia: constantly be sitting with her and like just spilling their guts. And I would do
Mia: this too. I'd go get a coffee from the coffee shop, and I'd just sit on the
Mia: bench, and this cat would come and climb on my lap, and it'd just be like, and I
Mia: just imagine, like, what are the stories that this cat must hear from people who
Mia: are just, you know, really stressed and really lonely and don't really have
Mia: anyone to talk to? So I kind of wanted to say something about community and about
Mia: loneliness and about how human it is to seek out that connection. And like, it
Mia: feels really silly, like, spilling your guts to a cat, telling a cat your deepest,
Mia: most vulnerable feelings. But it's also something that's really human and
Mia: something that we all do. Yeah. So I wanted to treat the idea with a lot of
Mia: sincerity. Um, like, I want people to feel a little bit seen.
Nic: Yeah. I like that. So this podcast is about creativity and identity and
Nic: disability. What's your relationship with disability?
Mia: so I'm diagnosed with ADHD. I was diagnosed as an adult. But, um, I think a lot
Mia: of people knew quite early on. I was one of those kids that got put in detention quite
Mia: a lot for like drawing on the tables and forgetting my homework and, you know, all of
Mia: the classic, you know, bright kid who just can't quite get it together, you know, that
Mia: a lot of people experience. Um. And I also suffered a spinal injury when I was 19, in
Mia: a gymnastics accident, that has like inhibited my mobility. Um, which is huge
Mia: because, like, martial arts has always been a really big part of my life. I also got
Mia: very into dance for a little while. Right before the injury, I was competing in
Mia: and, uh, that's something that's been, like, you know, something that I've had to
Mia: grapple with a lot. And it's something that's, you know, contributed to those
Mia: really lonely feelings. Like, particularly when I was working in these
Mia: oppressive corporate jobs, you know, can I have an extra work-from-home day because
Mia: I will literally destroy my body doing this commute? And being told, well,
Mia: everybody else is doing
Nic: it.
Mia: It's just like, you know. But it's it's a little bit different
Nic: in terms of identity being so focused on body movement, on martial arts,
Nic: on kung fu, which is a lot of internal, not just external. A spinal injury would
Nic: really have thrown you for a loop, I would imagine.
Mia: yeah. Um, there was a period very shortly after the injury where I couldn't, I could
Mia: barely walk. I, the doctor told me that I could leave the hospital as soon as
Mia: I could walk out myself, so I walked with the help of about four people who helped,
Mia: like, kind of assisted- walk me to a car. I was dropped off at my flat, and I could do
Mia: very, very little for a good few weeks. And then when I was finally able to like
Mia: walk by myself again, I went back to kung fu, and they were like, hey, where have
Mia: you been? I was like, ah, I've not been able to sit up for like three weeks.
Mia: it's a really, it's an interesting thing with spinal injuries in specific, because
Mia: it was damage to the nerve, and you have to very slowly reintroduce new movements,
Mia: and every time you do something that your body isn't used to, it hurts like a bitch,
Mia: pardon my French. Yeah. And, uh, you have to kind of build up a lot of courage to experiment
Mia: with movement again, and to like make yourself do these movements that you
Mia: haven't done in a long time, knowing that your back could just go nope at any
Mia: minute, and you're just going to be flat on your back on the floor again, and you
Mia: don't know when you're going to be able to get up. Uh, so that's hard, and that was
Mia: life for quite a long time.
Nic: How does that tie into your watercolor illustrations and your game
Nic: development?
Mia: So, when you can't sit up, you can still draw and you
Mia: can still write. Um, it's something that kind of gets me out of myself a little bit,
Mia: something that feels very internal and very personal, that I can still do and
Mia: still do comfortably when my body isn't listening to me. Some, like, it's really
Mia: hard to keep that, to not just become very depressed by all, and to not just
Mia: kind of shrink back into yourself and go, I'm just gonna sit and stare at the
Mia: ceiling and just, you know, be sad. And sometimes you need to be sad, but it's
Mia: hard to keep yourself from going too far down that dark hole.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: and allowing myself some kind of a creative outlet really helps me to just
Mia: maintain a bit of a positive attitude and be like, hey, you know, this is temporary.
Mia: It's a part of life.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: And, uh, it'll pass, and I'll be up again. And you have to, you kind of
Mia: have to tell yourself that.
Nic: Do you think of yourself as a disabled person who makes things, or as
Nic: a maker who is disabled?
Mia: I'd say that I'm a maker who is disabled. I prefer that. That
Mia: feels more fitting to me. Um, because I've been creating forever. Like, it's always
Mia: been something that's brought me joy, and it's something that continues to bring me
Mia: joy. I've always had ADHD, even if I haven't always known it. But I haven't
Mia: always, you know, had a physical disability.
Nic: ADHD, a lot of the people that I know that have ADHD tend to be serial
Nic: hobbyists.
Mia: Yeah.
Nic: Have you, um, have you gone down that path? And if yes, what has, why have you
Nic: settled on watercolor and directed that towards game making?
Mia: I think that making games is something that really like scratches that
Mia: serial hobbyist itch, that it lets you lean into that impulse, because,
Mia: like I said, there are so many different elements to it. Like, you can swap between
Mia: coding and writing and drawing and whatever else the game needs. Um, so, like, my
Mia: game is a narrative game where there's not a huge amount of like mechanical gameplay.
Mia: But if you're making a game that's really mechanics-heavy, that's another way
Mia: that you can let your brain wander and let yourself be creative. I mean, I'm also
Mia: selling jackets at the tattoo parlor, like, and I'm doing martial arts in the
Mia: evenings, like, you know, the things don't end. Yeah. I struggle to say that I've
Mia: settled on anything at any given point because there's always something on the
Mia: horizon. I do see myself doing game dev for a long time, because it is something
Mia: that, you know, allows me to lean into that, you know, impulse to do lots of things.
Nic: Yeah. Yeah. I do watercolor and sketching, and I do quilting, and I do
Nic: photography, and I've tried so many different things, and I've kind of settled
Nic: on those, you know, sketching and quilting and photography. But that's what I'm doing
Nic: now. Who knows what I'm going to be doing two years down the road? In terms of
Nic: creative thinking, um, there's this idea that navigating the world when you're disabled,
Nic: and the world isn't really built for you, for example, your teachers saying, hey,
Nic: you have to do these things and don't get out of there, um, people say it produces a
Nic: kind of creative thinking that is more, or different. Do you find that connects
Nic: to how you work?
Mia: Growing up with ADHD, you're always finding your own way of doing things, and
Mia: you're building coping strategies upon coping strategies. And I think, I don't
Mia: know if this is relatable to a lot of people with ADHD, but sometimes your
Mia: coping strategies will work brilliantly for like nine months, a year, two years,
Mia: and then just stop. So you kind of have to focus and refocus and change tack, like,
Mia: quite a lot. And you need to rotate through your toolkit and see what's
Mia: working for you one day, what's not working the next day. And I think that
Mia: kind of keeps your brain active in a really creative way.
Nic: You mentioned loneliness earlier. Do you work better when you work alone, or do
Nic: you work better as part of community?
Mia: So I love working in teams. Um, the industry that I've chosen, like the legal
Mia: industry, isn't very inclined towards disabled and neurodivergent people. Um, you kind of
Mia: have these really oppressive hierarchical structures at play, and if you don't fit
Mia: into the mold, you'll just kind of be hung out to dry. So I've chosen like a
Mia: self-employed path because it allows me to use my skills in a way that, you know, I
Mia: know works for me, and that isn't, you know, restricted by these structures. But
Mia: I think that the thing that I like about this job, and where I found balance, is
Mia: that it is very social still. Like, I'm working with lots of different clients.
Mia: I'm working with a lot of creatives, and I get to bounce ideas off of other people on
Mia: the daily, and I never feel like I'm alone in it. I also have really good
Mia: mentors. Like, there are so many games lawyers around. I didn't know
Mia: there were, like, so many of us. But there are plenty of game lawyers running around,
Mia: and they're all just such cool people. So I always feel like I have people that I
Mia: go to if I have questions or if I need support. I feel a lot less lonely as
Mia: a self-employed person than I did when I was working in corporate and surrounded by
Mia: people every day.
Nic: So if we were to apply that same question to your game development and your
Nic: watercolor, does the same thing hold?
Mia: I can be a little bit of a control freak when it comes to my work. I am
Mia: collaborating with other creatives on the game. I'm working with a 3D artist at the,
Mia: to try and bring some of those 2D drawings into a 3D world, and like,
Mia: somebody who's just very good at blending those two worlds and can see the vision
Mia: and is on board with it. And that's really easy. Uh, I'm also working with composers, and
Mia: I know nothing about music. Like, I did singing as a kid, and, you know,
Mia: my husband's really into jazz and knows a lot of music theory, and, you know,
Mia: there's a lot of putting chords together. And like, I know some of the basic
Mia: vocabulary, but like, it sometimes can be hard to just let creatives do their thing,
Mia: because I know they're going to make their best work if I just take my hands
Mia: away. Yeah. Um, I can get quite anxious about that collaborative process, but I've been, I
Mia: like to think I'd be quite good at letting my team do the things that they're
Mia: good at, and things are working out really well, and I'm really happy with it. But
Mia: yeah, I definitely have that tendency in me.
Nic: What have you made that you regret making?
Mia: I don't think I regret making anything. Like, I've made things that
Mia: haven't always turned out the way that I wanted. Um, I've worked like as part of
Mia: creative teams where we weren't aligned and it was kind of messy, and the
Mia: product as a result wasn't good. But all of it is learning, and learning how to
Mia: hone your own craft and your own skills, and learning how to work with other
Mia: people, and sometimes learning when to walk away from a project. Um, so I don't
Mia: regret making anything. I think even those projects that kind of get left on the
Mia: cutting room floor, there's value to be gained there.
Nic: When do you decide to leave something? When, if there is
Nic: one, what's the trigger to say, oh, all right, this isn't gonna work? And let's
Nic: move on.
Mia: when people in the team don't respect each other. Um, like I said, I had that
Mia: control freak tendency in me.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: I know that I can't do better than what my composers are doing, because that
Mia: is their craft and they know it a lot better than I do. If I was being very
Mia: critical of them and critical of their skills, uh, they should leave. Like, you know, it's,
Mia: like, there's constructive ways to say, oh, you know, can you tweak this? Or we're
Mia: going for more of this kind of a feeling. But if it gets to the point where it's
Mia: like, somebody isn't respecting your ability to create,
Nic: yeah,
Mia: not respecting what you bring to the table, that's when I say it's time to walk
Mia: away from the project. Um, yeah, because I think when you're working collaboratively
Mia: on something creative, like, trust is everything, respect is everything. And you
Mia: need to be able to, you know, pull things apart and critique things and build
Mia: something cohesive, build something together. And you can't, you have to
Mia: have respect for your fellow creators. Otherwise that just that just doesn't
Mia: work.
Nic: Yeah. Respect is so important. Are there things you feel you can't make,
Nic: subjects or forms that you feel are off
Mia: I mean, I don't have all of the skills in the world. Um, I've tried to dip my
Mia: toe into 3D modeling and it did not go well. Uh, the original vision for my game
Mia: didn't involve watercolor illustration. I opened up Blender and I opened up Unreal
Mia: Engine, which at the time I kind of naively thought was, it's got a bit of a
Mia: reputation for being the engine that you use when you want to make games that are
Mia: really pretty and really visually stunning. Um, so I picked that up and I made
Mia: something that looked like an absolute trash fire. And I spent about three months
Mia: on it, and I sat back from it after three months and went, so I like coding and I
Mia: like drawing and I haven't done either in the whole process of making this game for
Mia: three months.
Nic: Right.
Mia: Let's pivot. So, like, I don't think that 3D modeling is off limits. It's
Mia: definitely something I can't do now. I have so much respect for people who can do
Mia: it. Maybe I'll give it a go and try and pick it up again when I've got like the
Mia: and the time and the mental energy to try and tackle it again. Uh, but
Mia: right now I'm happy leaving that to the 3D artists.
Nic: Your game hasn't released yet. Um, but I imagine you've shared your progress with
Nic: other people. Have you noticed a gap between what you intend people to take
Nic: from what you're doing and what they're actually feeding back to you?
Mia: so when I first started sharing the build, it was very, very rough. Like, some
Mia: of the writing had been done. I'd written, I think I'd written a couple of
Mia: storylines completely, but the characters were like little outline stick
Mia: The cat was four frames of like a walking animation, but it was just an outline with
Mia: no color, and everyone was just a box. Like, it was just like a gray box moving
Mia: around a 3D space with a picture of a cat on the front. And I was surprised when I was
Mia: showing that around to people, being like, hey, I got the box to move, how much the
Mia: vision was already starting to come across. Like, people were getting the vibe
Mia: from the dialogue and what I was trying to do. And then as it started to come
Mia: together, like, the art being added on top, like, actually finished and painted, it
Mia: felt like I was successfully communicating an idea to people. I think
Mia: still, like, points in which people misunderstand, like, my game is
Mia: completely narrative. You can't really affect the story. You're a cat. Like,
Mia: you're just there to experience the story through the characters who are talking to
Mia: you. You can meow at people. Um, you cannot meow at people, uh, but you can't like talk
Mia: back to them or say anything that's going to materially change their lives, aside
Mia: from them feeling comfort in your presence. Um, I've had people not quite get
Mia: that aspect. Some people, like, oh, do the people give you quests? Do they ask you to
Mia: do things? Can you change the outcome of the story by doing different
Mia: things? It's like, no, you're a cat. Like, yeah, that's the main thing that I think that
Mia: some people don't really vibe with, with the game. But plenty of people like a
Mia: linear narrative story where you're just kind of vibing out and experiencing it.
Mia: So, you know, my game is for the people that get it, and I'm finding that a lot of
Mia: people get it and a lot of people are excited for
Nic: it. I think there's something to be said about storytelling in
Nic: a different way, rather than you have to be FPS, kill
Nic: everything in sight and interact with everything, and, oh, is this loot?
Nic: I think different paces is important for different people at different
Nic: times.
Mia: Yeah. And I grew up playing a lot of FPSs and shooting things and picking up
Mia: loot. And it's a different kind of experience. But the thing that I've always
Mia: loved about games, whether you're shooting things and picking up loot, or, you know,
Mia: talking to characters and getting a story that way, is that the story is always kind
Mia: of told through the world, through interacting with the world, whether it's,
Mia: you know, shooting at the world or talking to the world. And that's something that a
Mia: lot of games have in common, and that's something that I really wanted to lean
Mia: into. Um, I like games that feel very mundane and make you feel really small. Like, my
Mia: favorite, one of my favorite Legend of Zelda games is Wind Waker, like,
Mia: you're just a kid and the world is flooded, and you sail around, and it feels really
Mia: peaceful, but you also feel really tiny because you spend ages on the sea sailing
Mia: from place to place. And that's something that I really enjoy.
Nic: Is there a game that you wish you'd made? And why that one?
Mia: I wish I'd made. I would have, if I could have been on the team for
Mia: Sorry We're Closed, that would have just made my entire life. I'd be like, I could
Mia: die happy. This is like one of the coolest, most unique pieces of art that
Mia: exists in the gaming space. Um, like, I make most of the game by myself, as a solo
Mia: project. Uh, I don't see any games out there that I'm like, I could have made this, or I
Mia: would have wanted to have made this, because I think with solo devs it's very
Mia: kind of personal, it's a very unique creative vision. But I've seen games that
Mia: I'm like, man, I would have loved to have been like a character artist in this game,
Mia: or I would have loved to have been a writer in this game. And I think, like,
Mia: Sorry We're Closed is one. Um, one of like one of my more rogue influences is a game
Mia: called Deadly Premonition, which is just absolutely insane. It's heavily inspired
Mia: by Twin Peaks, and it's a game where you're solving a murder in
Mia: a small town. And you think this has nothing to do with the game where you're
Mia: playing as a cat. But one of the things that I really like about it is, you can go
Mia: into people's houses and see how life is moving on in the wake of this tragedy.
Mia: And like, you can see people comforting each other and bonding with each other,
Mia: and you really get like an insight into the fact that these are real people
Mia: dealing with grief. And that's a huge influence in my game. So like, looking at
Mia: these projects, these are projects that I'm not like, oh, I wish I'd made this.
Mia: But I'm really very inspired by it, and like, I think about the team and all the
Mia: people who are responsible for injecting it with these little details. And it's
Mia: just like, art to have been part of that. That would have been cool.
Nic: So eventually, this game is going to be finished. What are you going to be
Nic: doing after that? Or what would you be doing now if you weren't doing game
Nic: development?
Mia: If I wasn't doing this game, there are other ideas cooking. I've already
Mia: thought about, like, I'm not necessarily, the next title that I'm
Mia: make, but at least the next idea that I'm gonna workshop, because it is such
Mia: a process, when it comes to game development, of, like, you know, finding
Mia: the fun and finding the idea that works, and what people are vibing with. If I
Mia: wasn't doing game development, um, I really want to get good at oil painting. It's
Mia: something that I've been afraid of for a long time. Uh, I'd probably be leaning into
Mia: that and giving that a go. Um, yeah, I'm addicted to picking up a hundred different
Mia: hobbies and constantly trying new things. So I'd be just scouting around for, yeah, what
Mia: the next thing is, to keep that impulse.
Nic: I probably would not recommend trying to do frame-by-frame animation with oil
Nic: painting unless you have the patience.
Mia: Absolutely not.
Nic: Has your creative practice ever changed something you thought about
Nic: yourself or believed about yourself?
Mia: I think that happens constantly. I think when it comes to doing something
Mia: like game development, where it's a piece of art that's like the process is drawn
Mia: out over many, many months, you spend ages working on the same thing, uh, sometimes you
Mia: step back from something and you're really, like, you don't realize the
Mia: amount of time that you've put into something until you're stepping back from
Mia: it, like, months later, going like, whoa, I built this.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: Like, it's made me feel a lot more confident in my ability to pick
Mia: things up and put things together. Uh, another thing is, I've always been kind of
Mia: self-critical about my art and about showing it to people. But like, drawing
Mia: game assets, they kind of take on a life of their own. And like, you see the thing
Mia: that you drew in its own little world doing its own little thing, and you know,
Mia: that something about that just feels really special. Like, if you
Mia: draw a piece of art in your sketchbook and then you take it out and you frame it
Mia: and you put it on your wall, and it's like, now part of a space, and it's, you know,
Mia: giving that space an energy, it just feels different to letting it just exist
Mia: in its sketchbook. And like, game development's a little bit like that.
Mia: Like, I've drawn this cat a hundred times, each individual frame doesn't really have a
Mia: purpose on its own. But it's part of something that's like a little bit bigger
Mia: than itself, and that's made me feel a lot more confident in my own art and in
Mia: showing people my art and feeling like people are understanding what I'm trying
Mia: to do.
Nic: Yeah. Technical question for you, which isn't so technical, but I'm curious
Nic: about it. What is your favorite brand of watercolors, and what paper do you like to
Nic: use? And what's your, uh, your ink of choice?
Mia: Um, so I missed that last bit. Was the last part, the last
Nic: bit, what is your ink of choice?
Mia: Okay. So, favorite watercolors, I use Winsor Newton. Um, I use the pan ones,
Mia: not the,
Nic: yep,
Mia: like, if I use the tubes, I like, let it dry out into a pan, use it like that. Um, I
Mia: use the little Winsor Newton field kit. They don't do it with the
Mia: professional colors anymore. They now do it with the Cotman colors. Um, but you can get
Mia: the set and fill it with whatever colors you want from whichever range you want. I
Mia: also use Winsor Newton ink. I'm a bit of a Winsor Newton purist. Um, when I was
Mia: learning watercolors, I just picked up the cheapest notebook that I could find. It
Mia: wasn't even watercolor paper. And you paint on it, and the paint just kind of
Mia: sits on top of the paper and it's very unforgiving. Yeah, colors down and then
Mia: it's down. Uh, I recently bought my sister-in-law a sketchbook, like a nice
Mia: Moleskine sketchbook, uh, for Christmas. And whenever I gift somebody a sketchbook, I
Mia: always do the first page, because I think the first page is a little bit
Mia: intimidating. And it's also just kind of nice, like, hey, remember I got this for
Mia: you? And, oh my god, painting on that paper, which is like, it just took the paint
Mia: and it just looked amazing, and it was so much easier. I was like, um, this is a nice
Mia: experience.
Nic: Yeah,
Mia: I've been using the Faber-Castell watercolor pads for the animation for the
Mia: game. I haven't been punishing myself by using regular notepaper. It's not quite
Mia: as nice as the Moleskine sketchbook paper, though.
Nic: I will suggest that if you want to up your game in the sketchbook world for
Nic: watercolors, you might want to try the Hahnemühle 100% cotton sketchbook,
Nic: because it is as much better from the Moleskine than the Moleskine is from cartridge
Nic: paper. It is a world of difference. But anyway, that's just me geeking out.
Nic: over
Mia: I want to try the 100% cotton paper eventually, but I feel like I need to
Mia: build up to that level.
Nic: Well, that's the thing. At least for me, is that I was
Nic: intimidated by using good, expensive paper. But when I started, I realized, oh
Nic: my god, I'm so much better than I thought I was, and the results are a lot more
Nic: pleasing, so it's less of a struggle.
Mia: That makes a lot of sense. I think with me, this is something that I've
Mia: learned to do. Um, like with ADHD and picking up hobbies perpetually, it's very easy to
Mia: spend an awful lot of money. So I've put like parameters on myself, like, if
Mia: I'm sticking with a hobby for x amount of time, I'm allowed to invest in some nice
Mia: things for myself, like x amount of materials. I'm trying to resist the urge
Mia: to go out and make a lot of purchases unless I know that I'm really in this for
Mia: the long haul.
Nic: That makes sense.
Mia: yeah. And I wouldn't switch to different paper now for the game, because
Mia: you need a level of consistency there. Maybe once the game is out I'll treat
Mia: myself to a nice 100% cotton sketchbook.
Nic: Yeah. Or for your private sketchbook that you show nobody
Nic: else.
Mia: Yeah. Maybe,
Nic: yeah. What does your art and game making give you that nothing else does?
Mia: I think that with the game making in particular, it gives you an
Mia: amazing community. Like, I started getting into the games industry professionally by
Mia: going to playtest parties and like seeing people's work in progress. And like, I
Mia: think with game development in particular, it really gets you out of your comfort
Mia: zone. And especially, it kind of forces you to kill any perfectionist tendencies that
Mia: I think a lot of artists have, because you need to test if a game is viable before
Mia: you invest potentially years into making it. If you want to sell it. If you're
Mia: making something just for you and you don't plan on showing it to anyone, that's
Mia: a completely different thing.
Nic: Yeah.
Mia: but I wanted to kind of test myself to see if I could make a game that I could
Mia: release on Steam. And that forces you to go out and show people the gray box, just
Mia: a graphite pencil where everything is, you know, blocky and looks a bit weird.
Mia: Like, it forces you to show people that version of the game to see if you're onto
Mia: something. And I think that's really, really helpful, because you're getting
Mia: early feedback, you're kind of getting out of your own ego in terms of, like, I can't
Mia: show this yet, it's not quite ready. And you're getting into the habit of talking
Mia: about your process and your creative work with other people who are also doing the
Mia: same thing. And it gives you confidence as well, because you get to see other
Mia: people's work in progress. And it's like, okay, I can show this, because, you know,
Mia: nobody is being, you know, oh, but that's not good enough, or that doesn't look
Mia: right. Yeah. Everybody understands that it's a process.
Nic: Yeah. Second-to-last question for you. Is there something we haven't
Nic: discussed that you would like to discuss, as it relates to disability, creativity,
Nic: game making?
Mia: I think that the games industry in particular has got
Mia: a lot of participation by an extremely, like, diverse kind of groups of
Mia: people. Um, you get a lot of people with disabilities in the games
Mia: industry. Um, you get a lot of people of, like, marginalized genders in the games
Mia: industry. And I think everybody is very accepting, and people connect over being,
Mia: like, a little bit weird. Because I think creatives are all a little bit weird. I
Mia: feel like you have to be. Um, and just being a little bit of a rebel and a little bit of
Mia: an outcast. And I think that it's a very, like, safe environment to kind of put
Mia: yourself into, because I think there's a lot of stereotypes. You know, people
Mia: think of gamers, they think of, like, 14-year- olds on Xbox Live playing Halo and
Mia: like yelling slurs at each other. But if you go to like a play- test party in
Mia: London, uh, the community is so vibrant and full of all different kinds of people, and
Mia: is so welcoming and is so nice. And I think that that's been really, really good
Mia: for me, because it's allowed me to connect with people who I can relate to, and in
Mia: ways that I couldn't relate to people when I was working in corporate law.
Nic: Thank you. Last question for you. Where can people find you? Where can
Nic: people find your work? Uh, because I assume people are going to be as interested to
Nic: discover this game that you're making and seeing your illustrations as I am.
Mia: So, um, I post a lot about my game development on LinkedIn, so that's just
Mia: me as Seljubac on LinkedIn. I'm really easy to find. Um, I'll post, I post about, you
Mia: know, the work I do with other creatives as a lawyer, uh, on there. But I also will post
Mia: about my game and the creative process and how things are going. Uh, I have an
Mia: itch.io where there is an extremely early build of the game. It looks a lot better
Mia: now than the version in there. But if you want to get like an insight into that
Mia: super early process and what the game looked like six months in when I was first
Mia: starting, uh, you can play that now. Uh, my itch.io profile is called S-A-L-Y-U-M-A-N-D-E-R, so
Mia: like a salamander, but right, Salyumander. Um, and you can follow I Am the
Mia: Cat on Steam, and you can wish-list it, and you'll be updated when the demo is
Mia: out and when the final game is out.
Nic: Thank you. This has been a great chat.
Mia: Thank you very much.
Nic: That's it. I'm Nic Steenhout. This is The Work Between. If this sounds like your
Nic: kind of conversation, subscribe and I'll see you in the next episode.
Mia: Bye.